Explore reorg 1.0 (#24440)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/explore/ysql-language-features/data-manipulation.md

<!-- begin: nav tabs -->
{{<nav/tabs list="local,anywhere,cloud" active="local"/>}}

{{<nav/panels>}}
{{<nav/panel name="local" active="true">}}
<!-- local cluster setup instructions -->
{{<setup/local numnodes="1" rf="1" >}}

{{</nav/panel>}}

{{<nav/panel name="anywhere">}} {{<setup/anywhere>}} {{</nav/panel>}}
{{<nav/panel name="cloud">}}{{<setup/cloud>}}{{</nav/panel>}}
{{</nav/panels>}}
<!-- end: nav tabs -->

For illustration, let us consider the following employee schema,

```sql
CREATE TABLE employees (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    name TEXT,
    department TEXT DEFAULT 'Engineering'
);
```

## Simple insert

The INSERT statement in SQL is used to add new rows of data into a table. It specifies the table to insert data into, followed by the columns and the corresponding values. A simple INSERT statement is the most basic way to populate a table with new information. To add a row on to the employees table, you can run,

```sql
INSERT INTO employees (id, name, department) VALUES (1, 'Johnny Depp', 'Marketing');
```

If you are certain about the order of the columns in the table, you can skip mentioning the column names and just specify the value like:

> 

Reviewer: @premkumr

Assuming you know the order of columns in the table, you can insert a row by executing the following command:

```sql
INSERT INTO employees VALUES (1, 'Johnny Depp', 'Marketing');
```

## Multiple rows

You can insert multiple rows in a single `INSERT` statement by specifying multiple values, as shown in the following example:

```sql
INSERT INTO employees VALUES
    (1, 'Johnny Depp', 'Marketing'),
    (2, 'Brad Pitt', 'Sales'),
    (3, 'Angelina Jolie', 'Operations');
```

## Default values

Default values allow you to define a value that will automatically be inserted into a column if no explicit value is provided during an INSERT operation. This is useful for ensuring that columns always have meaningful data, even when some values are not specified by the user.

```sql

> INSERT INTO employees (id, name) VALUES (4, 'Bruce Lee');

Reviewer: @premkumr

Although you can assign a default value to a column [via a sequence](../../../develop/data-modeling/primary-keys-ysql/#sequence) typically, you add sequences using the [serial](../../../develop/data-modeling/primary-keys-ysql/#serial) pseudotype that creates a new sequence object and sets the default value for the column to the next value produced by the sequence like:

```sql
CREATE TABLE employees2 (
    id serial,
    name text,
    department text
);
```

This allows you to omit the serial column during `INSERT` as in the following example:

```sql
INSERT INTO employees2 (name, department) VALUES ('Johnny Depp', 'Sales');
```

Alternatively, you can provide the `DEFAULT` keyword as the column's value, as shown in the following example:

```sql
INSERT INTO employees2 (id, name, department) VALUES (DEFAULT, 'Johnny Depp', 'Sales');
```

## Update rows

The UPDATE statement is used to modify existing data in a table. With this command, you can change the values of one or more columns for rows that meet specified conditions, precisely controlling which records need to be altered. Typically UPDATE is used in conjunction with the SET statement.

> To update the name of a specific employee, you can run specify a WHERE clause like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To update the name of a specific employee, you can specify a WHERE clause, like so:
```

```sql
UPDATE employees SET name = 'Dwayne Jhonson' WHERE id = 2;
```

> If you decide to rename your `Marketing` department to `Brand Management`, you can update all the `Marketing` data as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you decide to rename your `Marketing` department to `Brand Management`, you can update all the `Marketing` data as follows:
```

```sql
UPDATE employees SET department = 'Brand Management' WHERE department = 'Marketing';
```

> To update the department of all employees to `Sales`, you can run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To update the department of all employees to `Sales`, you can run the following:
```

```sql
UPDATE employees SET department = 'Sales';
```

> You can also perform mathematical operations on columns where permitted. For example, you can change the ids for all employees by incrementing by 1 like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also perform mathematical operations on columns where permitted. For example, you can change the IDs for all employees by incrementing by 1:
```

```sql
UPDATE employees SET id = id + 1;
```

## Upsert

> An `UPSERT` is a combination of "UPDATE" and "INSERT," allowing you to either insert a new row into a table or update an existing row if it already exists. This operation is particularly useful for avoiding duplication while ensuring data is either added or updated as needed. This functionality is provided by the `INSERT ... ON CONFLICT DO UPDATE` clause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An UPSERT is a combination of UPDATE and INSERT, allowing you to either insert a new row into a table or update an existing row if it already exists. This operation is particularly useful for avoiding duplication while ensuring data is either added or updated as needed. This functionality is provided by the `INSERT ... ON CONFLICT DO UPDATE` clause.
```

> For example, if we try to insert record `(1, 'Johnny Depp', 'Sales')` you will get an error like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you try to insert the record `(1, 'Johnny Depp', 'Sales')`, you get an error:
```

```sql{.nocopy}
ERROR:  23505: duplicate key value violates unique constraint "employees_pkey"
```

> This is because, the record `(1, 'Johnny Depp', 'Marketing')` already exists. Now instead of an error to be thrown, we can either ask the server to ignore the insert with `DO NOTHING` like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because the record `(1, 'Johnny Depp', 'Marketing')` already exists. Instead of having an error thrown, you can ask the server to ignore the insert using DO NOTHING:
```

```sql
INSERT INTO employees (id, name, department)
    VALUES (1, 'Johnny Depp', 'Sales')
    ON CONFLICT (id)
    DO NOTHING;
```

> which would return `INSERT 0 0` to signify no rows were inserted, or we can choose to update the any other column other than the conflicted column (say, department) like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This would return `INSERT 0 0` to signify no rows were inserted. Alternatively, you can choose to update any other column other than the conflicted column (say, department) like so:
```

```sql
INSERT INTO employees (id, name, department)
    VALUES (1, 'Johnny Depp', 'Sales')
    ON CONFLICT (id)
    DO UPDATE SET department = EXCLUDED.department || ', ' || employees.department;
```

Now if you select the rows from the table, you will see that the department for `Johnny Depp` has been updated to `Sales, Marketing`.

```caddyfile{.nocopy}
 id |      name      |    department
----+----------------+------------------
  1 | Johnny Depp    | Sales, Marketing
  2 | Brad Pitt      | Sales
  3 | Angelina Jolie | Operations
```

## Delete rows

The DELETE statement in SQL is used to remove one or more rows from a table based on a specified condition. This operation is crucial for maintaining and managing the integrity of data within a database.

{{<tip>}}

> To remove entire tables or databases you would need to use the DROP statement. The DELETE statement allows for more granular control by targeting specific records.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To remove entire tables or databases you use the DROP statement. The DELETE statement allows for more granular control by targeting specific records.
```

{{</tip>}}

> For example to remove a specific a employee, you can run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to remove a specific a employee, you can run:
```

```sql
DELETE FROM employees WHERE id = 1;
```

> And to remove all employees in the `Sales` department, you can run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To remove all employees in the `Sales` department, you can run:
```

```sql
DELETE FROM employees WHERE department = 'Sales';
```

## Retrieve affected rows

> To return specific column values directly after data modification via INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE operations, without the need for a separate SELECT query you can use the RETURNING statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To return specific column values directly after data modification via INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE operations, without the need for a separate SELECT query, you can use the RETURNING statement.
```

> For example, say you want tp update the id of an employee and in the same statement, you want to get back the name and the new id. For this you can do:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, say you want to update the ID of an employee, and in the same statement you want to get back the name and the new ID. Do the following:
```

```sql
UPDATE employees SET id = id + 10
  WHERE id = 1
  RETURNING name, id;
```

> In cases of row deletion, you can retrieve the contents of the deleted row, as shown the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In cases of row deletion, you can retrieve the contents of the deleted row, as follows:
```

```sql
DELETE FROM employees WHERE department = 'Sales' RETURNING *;
```

## Constraints

Constraints enforce rules on the data to ensure accuracy and consistency, such as preventing duplicate values or maintaining relationships between tables. Constraints ensure data validity and integrity, preventing invalid data from being inserted or updated.

### CHECK Constraint

> The CHECK constraint in SQL is used to enforce specific rules on the values that can be entered into a column. It ensures that all data in a table meets predefined conditions, improving data integrity by preventing invalid entries. For example, in the employees table you add a validation rule to check for sanity of the department name like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CHECK constraint in SQL is used to enforce specific rules on the values that can be entered into a column. It ensures that all data in a table meets predefined conditions, improving data integrity by preventing invalid entries. For example, in the employees table you add a validation rule to check for sanity of the department name like so:
```

```sql
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS employees4;
CREATE TABLE employees4 (
  id integer PRIMARY KEY,
  name text,
  department text CHECK (char_length(department) >= 3)
);
```

{{<note>}}

> You can add a explict name for the constraint like `department text CHECK valid_dept (char_length(department) >= 3)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add an explict name for the constraint. For example:

`department text CHECK valid_dept (char_length(department) >= 3)`
```

{{</note>}}

> Now when you insert into the table an invalid department name like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now when you insert an invalid department name into the table, like this:
```

```sql
INSERT INTO employees4 VALUES(2, 'John', 'X');
```

> an error would be thrown like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An error is thrown:
```

```sql{.nocopy}
ERROR:  23514: new row for relation "employees4" violates check constraint "employees4_department_check"
```

> You can add a check constraint after the table is created with ALTER TABLE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add a check constraint after the table is created using ALTER TABLE.
```

```sql
ALTER TABLE employees4
  ADD CONSTRAINT id_check CHECK (id > 0);
```

> ### UNIQUE Constraint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### UNIQUE constraint
```

> The UNIQUE constraint ensures that all values in a specified column (or a group of columns) are distinct across the table, preventing duplicate entries. For example, you can enforce uniqueness of phone number in your employee table like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The UNIQUE constraint ensures that all values in a specified column (or a group of columns) are distinct across the table, preventing duplicate entries. For example, you can enforce uniqueness of phone number in your employee table as follows:
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE employees5 (
  employee_no integer PRIMARY KEY,
  name text,
  department text,
  phone integer UNIQUE
);
```

> When a record with a phone number already existing in the table is inserted, an error will be thrown as below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a record with a phone number that already exists is inserted into the table, an error is thrown:
```

```sql{.nocopy}
ERROR:  23505: duplicate key value violates unique constraint "employees5_phone_key"
```

> ### NOT NULL Constraint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### NOT NULL constraint
```

> The NOT NULL constraint ensures that a column cannot store NULL values, meaning that every row in the table must have a value for this column. For example, you can add a constraint to ensure that the employee name is always valid like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The NOT NULL constraint ensures that a column cannot store NULL values, meaning that every row in the table must have a value for this column. For example, you can add a constraint to ensure that the employee name is always valid as follows:
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE employees6 (
    employee_no integer NOT NULL,
    name text NOT NULL,
    department text
);
```

> When a NULL value for name is inserted, you will get an error as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a NULL value for name is inserted, you get an error:
```

```sql{.nocopy}
ERROR:  23502: null value in column "name" violates not-null constraint
```

### Foreign key constraint

> Foreign Key constraints are used to enforce referential integrity between two tables in a relational database. They create a link between data in two tables, ensuring that relationships between tables remain consistent. Foreign keys help prevent orphaned records by ensuring that references to related data remain valid. For example, consider the scenario where you have a `departments` table that has `dept_id` and other info and an employee table that links the employee with `dept_id`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Foreign Key constraints are used to enforce referential integrity between two tables in a relational database. They create a link between data in two tables, ensuring that relationships between tables remain consistent. Foreign keys help prevent orphaned records by ensuring that references to related data remain valid. For example, consider the scenario where you have a `departments` table that has `dept_id` and other info, and an employee table that links the employee using `dept_id`.
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE departments (
    dept_id INT PRIMARY KEY,
    dept_name VARCHAR(100)
);

CREATE TABLE employees (
    emp_id INT PRIMARY KEY,
    emp_name VARCHAR(100),
    dept_id INT,
        CONSTRAINT fk_department FOREIGN KEY (dept_id)
            REFERENCES departments(dept_id)
);
```

> As you have a foreign key constraint set up between these 2 tables, you will not be able to insert a row into the `employees` tables with an invalid `dept_id`. It will throw a `violates foreign key constraint` error like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you have a foreign key constraint set up between these tables, you won't be able to insert a row into the `employees` tables with an invalid `dept_id`. It will throw a `violates foreign key constraint` error:
```

```

```sql{.nocopy}
ERROR:  23503: insert or update on table "employees" violates foreign key constraint "fk_department"
```

### Deferring constraints

By default, constraints are checked immediately after each statement (INITIALLY IMMEDIATE), but with INITIALLY DEFERRED, the check is postponed until the transaction is committed. This is particularly useful when performing complex operations that might temporarily violate constraints but are resolved by the time the transaction is complete, particularly in the context of foreign key constraints.

Using DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED allows you to perform complex changes in a transaction without constraint violations, making sure that integrity checks are only performed when the transaction is about to complete. Without this, the following transaction will error out in Step 1.

```sql
BEGIN;
    -- Step 1: Insert a new the employee's info
    -- NOTE: dept `2000` does not exist as of now
    INSERT INTO employees VALUES(1, 'Brian', 2000);

    -- Step 2: Insert the new department
    INSERT INTO department VALUES(2000, 'Area-51');

-- Commit the transaction, which checks the constraints at this point
COMMIT;
```

> But when you add the `DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED` clause, the above transaction will succeed!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But when you add the `DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED` clause, the preceding transaction succeeds.
```
